Ilariae/ftintro (#33)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs: learn/fast-transfers.md

---

# Fast Transfers

## Overview

Moving liquidity across different networks in the broader blockchain ecosystem enables assets and value to flow freely. However, challenges such as fragmented liquidity and slow transfer times often hinder this process due to the time-to-finality across various chains. These issues can lead to inefficiencies and delays that negatively impact the user experience and the functionality of decentralized applications.

Fast Transfers is a protocol designed by Wormhole to address these challenges by providing a quick and efficient solution for cross-chain liquidity movement. Leveraging a hub-and-spoke model with Solana as the central hub, Fast Transfers consolidates liquidity into a single, unified pool. Solana was specifically chosen for its fast finality and low transaction costs, critical for enabling rapid asset transfers. This approach minimizes fragmentation by eliminating the need for multiple wrapped versions of the same token across different chains, ensuring a more streamlined and efficient transfer process.

> The key component of Fast Transfers is its aggregated auction mechanism, where solvers and market makers compete to offer the best rates for cross-chain transactions. This competitive environment ensures optimal pricing and efficient execution of transfers, significantly reducing wait times compared to traditional cross-chain methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key component of Fast Transfers is its aggregated auction mechanism, where solvers/market makers compete to offer the best rates for cross-chain transactions. This competitive environment ensures optimal pricing and efficient execution of transfers, significantly reducing wait times compared to traditional cross-chain methods.
```

---
title: Fast Transfers
description: Discover Fast Transfers, a protocol for quick, efficient cross-chain liquidity movement, addressing fragmentation and finality with a hub-and-spoke model.
---

# Fast Transfers

## Overview

Moving liquidity across different networks in the broader blockchain ecosystem is crucial for enabling assets and value to flow freely. However, this process is often hindered by challenges such as fragmented liquidity and slow transfer times due to the time-to-finality across various chains. These issues can lead to inefficiencies and delays that negatively impact the user experience and the functionality of decentralized applications.

> Fast Transfers addresses these challenges by introducing an innovative solution that ensures quick and efficient cross-chain liquidity movement. The protocol is built on Solana, which was chosen for its fast finality and low transaction costs. The unique feature that sets Fast Transfers apart is its aggregated auction mechanism, which operates within a hub-and-spoke model. In this model, Solana acts as the central hub, concentrating liquidity and enabling rapid transfers to destination chains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address such issues, Wormhole offers users/developers Fast Transfers. It introduces an innovative solution that ensures quick and efficient cross-chain liquidity movement. The protocol is built on Solana, which was chosen for its fast finality and low transaction costs. The unique feature that sets Fast Transfers apart is its aggregated auction mechanism, which operates within a hub-and-spoke model. In this model, Solana acts as the central hub, concentrating liquidity and enabling rapid transfers to destination chains.
```

> The core of Fast Transfers lies in its auction mechanism, where solvers and market makers compete to provide the best rates for cross-chain transactions. This competition and the liquidity aggregation layer allow the protocol to bypass the delays associated with traditional cross-chain transfers. By aggregating liquidity and employing an effective auction system, Fast Transfers significantly reduces wait times. It is a solid solution for developers building applications that require fast and reliable cross-chain asset transfers.

Reviewer: I like this structure much better but mentioning the auction mechanism here feels repetitive

> The core of Fast Transfers lies in its auction mechanism, where solvers and market makers compete to provide the best rates for cross-chain transactions. This competition and the liquidity aggregation layer allow the protocol to bypass the delays associated with traditional cross-chain transfers. By aggregating liquidity and employing an effective auction system, Fast Transfers significantly reduces wait times. It is a solid solution for developers building applications that require fast and reliable cross-chain asset transfers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Fast Transfers auctions, solvers and market makers compete to provide the best rates for cross-chain transactions. This competition and the liquidity aggregation layer allow the protocol to bypass the delays associated with traditional cross-chain transfers. By aggregating liquidity and employing an effective auction system, Fast Transfers significantly reduces wait times. It is a solid solution for developers building applications that require fast and reliable cross-chain asset transfers.
```

- **NTT USDC (Native Token Transfers USDC)** - Fast Transfers relies on [Native Token Transfers (NTT)](/learn/messaging/ntt/ntt-overview/){target=\_blank} for chains that don't support CCTP or lack a canonical version of USDC. In this scenario, USDC is locked on the hub chain, and an NTT message is sent to the destination chain to initiate the transfer
- **Liquidity through Wormhole-wrapped assets** - in cases where CCTP USDC or NTT USDC are unavailable, the chain must have liquidity in Wormhole-wrapped assets. These wrapped assets can be used as an intermediate currency to facilitate transfers

### Hub and Spoke Model

The hub-and-spoke model is a system architecture commonly used to optimize the movement of assets or information across a network. In this model, a central "hub" acts as the primary point of control and coordination, while "spokes" are the various endpoints or destinations that connect to the hub. This architecture is particularly effective in managing complex systems where resources need to be efficiently distributed and coordinated across multiple locations.

> #### Overview of the Hub and Spoke Model

Reviewer: We avoid titles with #### - I would remove this title as you are already speaking about the Hub and Spoke

At a high level, the hub-and-spoke model operates as follows:

> - **Hub** - the central node where all resources—data, assets, or information—are aggregated and managed. The hub handles the distribution to the spokes, acting as a central point of processing and coordination

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Hub** - the central node where all resources, data, assets, or information are aggregated and managed. The hub handles the distribution to the spokes, acting as a central point of processing and coordination
```

- **Spokes** - the spokes are the endpoints connected to the hub. In the case of blockchain, these are the different chains. The spokes rely on the hub to receive and send resources or information, creating a streamlined and centralized flow

> This model is highly efficient because it centralizes control and reduces the complexity of direct interactions between each endpoint. Instead of managing multiple direct connections, each spoke only needs to connect to the hub, simplifying the overall system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This model is highly efficient because it aggregates control and reduces the complexity of direct interactions between each endpoint. Instead of managing multiple direct connections, each spoke only needs to connect to the hub, simplifying the overall system.
```

Reviewer: Centralization is a word we tend to avoid haha

#### Application in Fast Transfers

Fast Transfers leverages the hub-and-spoke model to manage liquidity and execute cross-chain transfers with high efficiency. Here’s how it works within the Fast Transfers protocol:

> - **Hub chain** - Solana is the central hub where all liquidity is concentrated. Solana was selected as the hub due to its fast finality, low transaction costs, and strong support for the [Cross-Chain Transfer Protocol (CCTP)](https://www.circle.com/en/cross-chain-transfer-protocol){target=\_blank}. By centralizing liquidity on Solana, Fast Transfers can efficiently manage the distribution of assets across multiple chains through a competitive auction mechanism

Reviewer: Having another bullet for hub chain and spoke chain feels repetitive. I would remove and merge with the list from before

- **Spoke chains** - these are the destination chains to which assets are transferred. Rather than transferring tokens directly between source and destination chains, Fast Transfers routes all transactions through the Solana hub. This approach allows for a more streamlined and efficient transfer process

> ### How It Works

Reviewer: I would put this a bit higher up. Maybe provide the key steps of how it works and then go into detail on each? Another thing you don't mention is that with CCTP USDC is used as the base asset, so there is also USDC liquidity required to move assets etc

Fast Transfers operates through a series of well-defined steps to ensure quick and reliable cross-chain transfers:

> 1. **Hub chain** - the transfer process begins by moving assets from the source chain to the hub chain, Solana. Here, liquidity is concentrated, and the auction process takes place

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Liquidity aggregation** - the transfer process begins by moving assets from the source chain (a spoke) to the hub chain, Solana. Here, liquidity is concentrated, and the auction process takes place
```

> 2. **Auction process** - once the assets reach Solana, an auction is initiated on the hub chain. Solvers, who are market participants, bid to provide the best possible rate for the transfer. The winning solver executes the swap and facilitates the transfer to the destination chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Auction process** - once the assets reach Solana, an auction is initiated on the hub chain. Solvers, who are market participants, bid to provide the best possible rate for the transfer. The winning solver executes the swap and facilitates the transfer to the destination chain via:
```

> 3. **CCTP** - the protocol uses the [Cross-Chain Transfer Protocol (CCTP)](/learn/messaging/cctp/){target=\_blank} to manage the movement of assets from the hub chain. CCTP handles the burning of tokens on the source chain and the minting of equivalent tokens on the destination chain, ensuring the integrity of the transfer process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        -  **CCTP** - the protocol uses the [Cross-Chain Transfer Protocol (CCTP)](/learn/messaging/cctp/){target=\_blank} to manage the movement of assets from the hub chain. CCTP handles the burning of tokens on the source chain and the minting of equivalent tokens on the destination chain, ensuring the integrity of the transfer process
```

Reviewer: Please check that this renders well. But I removed the number because it is either CCTP or NTT

> 4. **[NTT (Native Token Transfers)](/learn/messaging/ntt/ntt-overview/){target=\_blank}** - for chains that do not support CCTP, Fast Transfers employs NTT messages. In this case, USDC is locked on Solana, and an NTT message is sent to the destination chain, triggering the transfer of an equivalent value of tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - **[NTT (Native Token Transfers)](/learn/messaging/ntt/ntt-overview/){target=\_blank}** - for chains that do not support CCTP, Fast Transfers employs NTT messages. In this case, USDC is locked on Solana, and an NTT message is sent to the destination chain, triggering the transfer of an equivalent value of tokens
```

This structured approach allows Fast Transfers to overcome the limitations of direct chain-to-chain transfers by using Solana as a central hub and leveraging the strengths of CCTP and NTT protocols, ensuring efficient and reliable liquidity movement across multiple chains.

## Auction Mechanism

### Overview of the Auction Mechanism

The auction mechanism is a core component of the Fast Transfers protocol, ensuring users receive the most efficient and cost-effective cross-chain transfers. It operates on the Solana network, where solvers compete to fulfill transfer requests by bidding in a reverse Dutch auction. This competitive environment drives down costs and speeds up the transfer process, benefiting both users and solvers.

### Auction Process

The auction process is designed to be straightforward yet effective, enabling solvers to bid on transfer requests while managing risk through a security deposit system. Here’s a detailed step-by-step breakdown of how the auction mechanism works:

> 1. **Initiation** - users initiate a transfer through the Fast Transfers protocol, either via a user interface (UI) or directly on-chain. They can choose between a standard transfer, which waits for finality on the sending chain, or a fast transfer, which triggers the auction process. For fast transfers, users specify a maximum fee they are willing to pay and a deadline by which the auction must start. This ensures that the process is both cost-effective and timely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Initiation** - users initiate a transfer through the Fast Transfers protocol, either via a user interface (UI) or directly on-chain. They can choose between a standard transfer, which waits for finality on the sending chain, or a Fast Transfer, which triggers the auction process. For Fast Transfers, users specify a maximum fee they are willing to pay and a deadline by which the auction must start. This ensures that the process is both cost-effective and timely
```

> 2. **Auction** - the auction begins on the Solana network when a user requests a fast transfer. Solvers monitor the network for these requests and initiate an auction by placing an offer to fulfill the transfer at or below the user’s specified maximum fee. To start the auction, the solver must transfer the amount of USDC requested by the user (X USDC) plus a small security deposit to the Fast Transfer hub on Solana. This deposit acts as a commitment to the process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Auction** - the auction begins on the Solana network when a user requests a Fast Tansfer. Solvers monitor the network for these requests and initiate an auction by placing an offer to fulfill the transfer at or below the user’s specified maximum fee. To start the auction, the solver must transfer the amount of USDC requested by the user (X USDC) plus a small security deposit to the Fast Transfer hub on Solana. This deposit acts as a commitment to the process
```

Reviewer: When do we put caps, and when do we not?

> 3. **Competition** - once the auction is initiated, other solvers can participate by submitting lower bids in a reverse Dutch auction. The goal is to provide end users with the best possible rate. If a new solver submits a better offer, the previous solver’s funds (X USDC and the security deposit) are returned, and the new offer takes precedence. This competitive process ensures that users receive the best possible transfer rate 

Reviewer: Add link to an explainer of Dutch auction?

4. **Fulfillment** - the winning solver must complete the transfer within a predefined grace period to earn their fee and security deposit back. If they fail to do so, their security deposit may be slashed, and the slashed amount is given to the user as compensation for any delays. This incentive mechanism rewards prompt execution.

> Upon successful completion, the Fast Transfer hub sends the X USDC to the user’s destination wallet, and the solver receives their security deposit back along with the fee for the transfer

Reviewer: Remove the space here so that the "Upon successful" is not in a next line. Nothing changes tho

- **Capital Efficiency** - the hub-and-spoke model used by Fast Transfers allows solvers to concentrate their liquidity on a single hub chain (Solana) rather than spreading it across multiple chains and assets. This consolidation simplifies liquidity management, reduces the need for complex rebalancing, and increases the fees earned per dollar of liquidity
- **Simplified Risk and Reward Structure** - since USDC is the exclusive settlement asset for the Fast Transfers protocol, solvers are insulated from the risks associated with volatile assets. The primary risk solvers need to consider is the finality risk of the source chain transaction. This straightforward risk assessment simplifies the bidding process and makes participation more attractive
- **New Revenue Streams** - by facilitating fast transfers, solvers can earn fees on each transfer they process. This creates a new source of income and allows solvers to capitalize on the growing volume of cross-chain transfers. Given Wormhole's track record of enabling billions of dollars in cross-chain asset transfers, solvers can expect significant opportunities to generate revenue

## Problem Addressed by Fast Transfers

> ### Liquidity Fragmentation

Reviewer: This can be added to the intro. Problem statement and solution should be near the top

One of the significant challenges in cross-chain asset transfers is liquidity fragmentation. This issue arises primarily due to wrapped tokens, such as those facilitated by the Wormhole Token Bridge. Transferring assets like USDC across different blockchain networks often results in creating multiple versions of the same token on various chains. For example, transferring native USDC from Solana and Arbitrum to Sui could result in creating two different tokens on Sui, leading to fragmented liquidity pools.

This fragmentation creates inefficiencies in the market, as liquidity is scattered across multiple versions of the same token rather than being concentrated in a single, cohesive pool. This complicates liquidity management and makes it more challenging for users and developers to move assets across chains without encountering delays, increased costs, or the risk of slippage.

> ### Solution Provided by Fast Transfers

Reviewer: Unsure if this is good here or just add it to the intro? It is good but having the solutions near the end is a bit of sad haha

### Benefits for Solvers

Participating in the Fast Transfers protocol offers several advantages for solvers:

- **Capital Efficiency** - the hub-and-spoke model used by Fast Transfers allows solvers to concentrate their liquidity on a single hub chain (Solana) rather than spreading it across multiple chains and assets. This consolidation simplifies liquidity management, reduces the need for complex rebalancing, and increases the fees earned per dollar of liquidity
- **Simplified Risk and Reward Structure** - since USDC is the exclusive settlement asset for the Fast Transfers protocol, solvers are insulated from the risks associated with volatile assets. The primary risk solvers need to consider is the finality risk of the source chain transaction. This straightforward risk assessment simplifies the bidding process and makes participation more attractive

> - **New Revenue Streams** - by facilitating fast transfers, solvers can earn fees on each transfer they process. This creates a new source of income and allows solvers to capitalize on the growing volume of cross-chain transfers. Given Wormhole's track record of enabling billions of dollars in cross-chain asset transfers, solvers can expect significant opportunities to generate revenue

Reviewer 2: The capitalization of these list items just needs to be fixed so only the first word is capitalized
